

I recently read F.A. Hayek's *Road to Serfdom* and Karl Polanyi's *The Great
Transformation* back to back. Both published in 1944, these great works of
poltiical economics were attempts by their authors to grapple with the collapse of western civilization into
the fascist totalitarianism of the Second World War. The books are generally understood to
have largely opposing views on the world, and to belong to vastly different
ends of the political spectrum, with Hayek, the great defender of classical liberalism,
arguing that socialism invariably leads to totalitarianism, and with Polanyi, champion of the embedded nature of economy in society,
arguing that "Market Society" is itself a utopian dream the inevitable collapse of which will result in
totalitarianism. But I think there is actually much more agreement between them
than meets the eye, especially in the way they both seem to transcend the crude
Left/Right dichotomy into a more "localist" predilection. It is this synergy between
the two that I aim to elucidate in this piece.

Both argue for:

- importance of local markets
- information economics
- need for gradual evolution of institutions
- importance of legal system

## The Road to Serfdom

Let's start with the Road to Serfdom, which is undisputably the more popular of
the two, and which for better or for worse, had a significant impact on
policy, especially in 1980s Britain and America. At a high level, the book is a
defense of the principles of classical liberalism and an attack on those of
socialism. Hayek argues that Socialism has an explicitly authoritarian origin in the writings of 
the French intellectuals who opposed the French revolution, and that the politics of
both the Left and the Right that would arise in Germany share a common socialist
root which is surprisingly fascist and united in its opposition to liberalism. 
He sees a great tragedy of collectivist thought in that it starts out with the presumption that reason is supreme, but
ends up destroying reason by misconceiving the processes which the growth of
reason depends on, namely, differences in knowledge and views of individuals.
Thus Hayek perceives his individualism as an "attitude of humility before this social process and of tolerance to other opinions and is the exact opposite of that intellectual hubris which is at the root of the demand for comprehensive direction of the social process".

Hayek's liberalism is based fundamentally on the principle that we should make as
much use as possible of the spontaneous forces of society, and as little use as possible of coercion.
However, he is no naive adherent to a static laissez-faire idealism. On the
contrary, he argues definitively in favour of a critical role for government in
the deliberate creation of institutions which facilitate the positive and
regulate the negative externalities of competition. He is a proponent of an
extensive system of social services, so long as they don't make competition
ineffective over wide fields. He supports regulations on the means of production
(eg. to restrict the use of poisons, or limit working hours, etc.) so long as
they are applied equally and not used as an indirect way to control prices. He
purports that competition depends on sound institutions of money, markets, and
information channels, not all of which can be adequately provided by the private
sector. 

Above all, Hayek stresses the importance of the Rule of Law - fixed, long-term, general purpose
rules that do not favour particular groups or people but can be used by anyone
to predict the behaviour of others and thus to collaborate in unplanned ways.
He argues that the application of the law without exception may be even more important
than the actual particulars of what the law says, emphasizing the utility
of the Rule of Law as an instrument for reducing uncertainty about the world and
thus enabling individuals to more effectively plan for themselves. 



End of Truth

similarity between Right and Left - opposition to liberalismimpetus towards totalitarianism comes mainly from two great vest interests: organized capital and organized labour 

impetus towards totalitarianism comes mainly from two great vest interests: organized capital and organized labour 


one decisive factor in the rise of totalitarianism in Europe, that hasn't happened yet in America, is large dispossesed middle class

International Peace.

systematic study of legal institution forms that foster competition has been
neglected - serious shortcomings with law of corporations and of patents

vagueness of "common good". requires comprehensive scale of values.
impossibility of unified view of "what should be done". require more agreement
than exists.

philosophy of indivdiualism - cognitive limits on how much of societies values
one can understand. only partial scales exist.

common action limitted to places where people agree. 

ppl agree they want a central plan, but cant a gree on a plan. tyranny of
minority.


when issue cant be regulated by general rules but power exists or is delegated, then it becomes arbitrary !

price of democracy that conscious control can only apply where true agreement exists, and other fields must be left to chance

democracy not as an end in itself, but a means for safeguarding internal peace and individual freedom



that only under the principles of classical liberalism
is democracy even able to persist, and that the roots of socialism are
explicitly authoritarian, 


the book makes
a number of arguments, which are roughly:

- Socialism as evil ideology - french roots, german left/right is same fascist
- Liberalism - deliberate institutions where spontaneity works
- Govt - 

Hayek argues that Socialism as
an ideology has an 





----

There are a number of biographical threads that tie Hayek and Polanyi together. Both were
born in late 19th century Vienna (Hayek in 1899, Polanyi in 1886). Both served for the Austro-Hungarian Empire in WWI. 
Both received doctorates in Law (Hayek from Vienna, Polanyi from Budapest). Both were
associated with Jewish intellectuals (Polanyi actually was Jewish, Hayek merely
suspected of being so). Both came from families of high intellectual
achievement; Polanyi's brother Michael was a noted polymath, contributing to
physical chemistry, economics, philosophy. Hayek's grandfather was a close friend of 
Bohm von Bawerk (co-founder of Austrian school of economics) and his second cousin was Wittgenstein.
Polanyi's daughter is herself an economist, who studied under Hayek at the LSE.
Both fled to London in the early 1930s.





