
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/genesis-mining-announces-pilot-project-to-recycle-crypto-mining-farm-energy-waste-into-energy-for-greenhouses-301192973.html

TODO: 

- link to local money article!

- Eth narrative. Bitcoin evolves more slowly

- confirm the wasted energy in the grid
- price of bitcoin needs to be kept in check with reality - if it goes too high, dirtier mining is incentivized ...

- money as "representing" and "storing" value everywhere
    - in creation and for individuals storing labour

- virus ponzi vs organism nakamoto




. This means that rather than
picking off low hanging fruit, the competitive pressure on Bitcoin miners is
being funneled into more fundamental R&D, which


In some sense, Bitcoin is a mirror into the rest of society, a lens for looking at the nature of 
money and finance, of our ideas of value.


The monetary revolution of
cryptocurrencies is about better [representation for stakeholders in our
institutional state machines][stakeholders-and-statemachines]. 

----------

https://twitter.com/naval/status/1380990577727008772 - buying bitcoin more
voting than investing
https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption#comparison
https://www.cell.com/joule/fulltext/S2542-4351(19)30087-X


- PoW
- first mover
- creed of saving
- simple
- bitcoin battery for renewables

But the question remains, in a world where Proof of Stake is widely available as
an energy efficient alternative, should mining based Bitcoin continue to exist? 

Sometime in 2016 I wrote a proposal for Bitcoin to adopt Proof of Stake. It was
a bit facetious, but we've been arguing for the better part of a decade now
about all the reasons mining is bad and Proof of Stake is better. Not that the
Bitcoin community would agree. And I don't blame them. When it comes to Bitcoin
itself, I actually don't agree either. Bitcoin's Proof of Work mechanism
actually provides something to the  world that we otherwise don't know how to
achieve. Not even Proof of Stake can provide it, even though we like to pretend
it can approximate pretty closely for all practical purposes. But Bitcoin isn't
concerned with practical purposes. Bitcoin  ...




Bitcoin mining can actually help make renewable energy sources more viable by
serving as a sort of financial battery. Solar energy setups 
require batteries to store surplus energy produced during
the day, and are limitted by the battery in what they can power 
at night or when it's cloudy. Once you've hit the limits of your battery,
instead of disipating the surplus, you can use it to mine Bitcoin, 
and store the value as financial energy
that can be used to purchase electricity later.

Bitcoin is an attempt to ground an economic system in the physical world.
It's by no means perfect, but it speaks to something fundamental, namely, the
distribution of computing power and energy production among humans. 





that more directly represents the values of communities.

Ok, you say, that's great, much respect to Bitcoin's innovation. But now that
the cats out of the bag, surely we don't need to keep wasting exorbitant amounts
of energy. Can't we just stop mining Bitcoin and move on with the rest of the
monetary revolution?


Proving the viability of alternative forms of money in the
world, namely money that represents the values of a community rather than the
liabilities of an unaccountable banking system, is perhaps the most important
legacy of Bitcoin, and is argu

Now, I hold no pretense that Bitcoin will take over the world. I'm not even
sure what that would mean or that it would be a good idea. But Bitcoin has
unleashed, and proven the viability of, arguably the most important idea in political economics
in centuries - that money should be created by and for the people that use it.


provides a trajectory for money to be based not on the liabilities of
largely unacountable banking system, 

Bitcoin are issued when anyone provably contributes energy
to securing the network.

Bitcoin are issued when someone provably does some work. Useless work, to be
sure, but they did it and they proved it, nonetheless.



## 

By all accounts, Bitcoin was supposed to be impossible. It was a joke. It couldn't
possibly work. Silly nerds, obsessing over open-source, verifiability,
transparency, decenentralization, and privacy. 

----

On the one hand, Elon is worshipped as the beacon of capitalism, 
of the power of the entrepreneur to change the world. And perhaps rightly so.
But on the other, what if the capitalist foundation is itself borked? 
What if what we need wasn't cleaner energy cars, but less cars altogether?

I'm not sure it's possible to settle the debate once and for
all, and I'm happy with my personal biases, but people are starting to ask me
how I reconcile Bitcoin's gargantuan energy use with my general
environmentalism, so I thought I'd sketch some thoughts. 

