
This would have a significant impact in maintaining the loyalty of his followers over 
the decades and in building a highly competent and effective tribe and army.

This had the dual effect of both abolishing the old aristocracy and increasing 
the likelihood that conquered people's would remain loyal to him as they came to be genuine members of his tribe.

This further disempowered aristocratic lineages and increased the loyalty of his followers, 
especially the poor and the soldiers, who knew they and their families would be looked after.


At this point the rising khan had conquerued and assimilated tribes of hundreds, but as he conquered the neighbouring Tatars,
which consisted of thousands, he needed more drastic measures. So with permission from his warriors, he murdered
all tall Tartar males and doubled down on assimilating the rest of the peoples, this time by even marrying some of them
himself. Though they were once a distinct ethnocultural group from the Mongols, so many Tatars
were assimilated that the Tatar name became synonymous with Mongol.


To become the undisputed ruler of the Mongolian people, Temujin still had two final trials.
He would have to defeat the tribe of Ong Khan, his mentor, guardian, and friend of his fathers, who would 
try to poison him, forcing him to flee precariously into the mountains, marking the low point of his 
military career. He would miraculously survive, find new, empire defining strength, and return in a successful
surprise attack on the Ong Khan. He would also have to defeat the tribe of his oldest friend, Jamuka, 
with whom he had sworn a blood oath many years prior, but whom had since become an arch enemy. Jamuka would eventually surrender
and ask to be killed to serve the khan better as a spirit in death. 


----


500 BCE - Turko Mongolian pastoralists

300 BCE - 100 CE - Xiongu  (proto turkic?)

200 BCE - 

300 CE - Proto Turks and Mongalian Nomadic Tribs

450 CE - Huns (prob partly turkish)

600 CE - Turkic Khaganate

pre gengis tribes:
Keraites, Khamag Mongol, Naiman, Mergid, Tatar

Jin enocuraged disputes


He suggests their rule was less burdensome than that of European nobility due to lighter taxes, tolerance of local customs and religions, more rational administration, and universal education for boys.

 Weatherford's book claims that the Mongols sought to increase that wealth by encouraging their subjects to be more productive and enterprising instead of increasing the tax burden on them. They did this by sponsoring lucrative international trade

 renaisance: paper, printing, gunpowder, compass, trade

 https://news.mongabay.com/2011/01/how-genghis-khan-cooled-the-planet/

 good summary: https://www.diplomacy.edu/resources/books/reviews/genghis-khan-and-making-modern-world

----

tactics

- set multiple campfires to look like bigger army in distance
- 

-----------


-----------

high school, idolized alexander the great.

persions had already united most of the territory. freed the jews from babylon. 
egypy + mesopotamia for centuries.

alex brought greece into the midst. fearless, huge ambition. visions of grandeur.
ambition to unite the world. megalomaniacal - thought he was god. died at 32.

hellenism. greco-buddhism. brought greece to the east. genghis would bring the east back.

genghis khan. unprivileged. blood clot. warring tribes. rose.

meritocracy. ban looting. strict codes. human. laws applied to him. died at 65.

tukish goes way back. genghis was mongol tribes, claims descendence from the hun. prob partially turkish, but mongol is distinct.
tatars were another tribe. 

meritocracy. loyalty. trusted cooks (father was poisoned).
assimilate the conquered. not as slaves. adopt and arry them. 
looting must wait for complete victory. in an organized way - he would redistribute like after a hunt.
shares for killed soldiers go to their widows and kids.
assimilated the tatars
organized warriers into squads of 10 . random mixing. forced to be brothers
similar to athenian lawgiver 2k years prior - transformed tribal city of athens into city state - gave it democracy
People of the Felt Walls. gers.

Great Law. reduce dissension within:
banned kidnapping women. abducting/enslaving other mongols. forbade selling women into marriage.
banned stealing animals. lost and found syste. forbade huntin from March-Oct
complete and total religious freedom.
exempted religious leaders from tax and public servie. extended to professionals - undertakers, doctors, lawyers, teachers, scholars
family election.
group responsibility and giult. 
law ruled even him.\
adopted writing


------------

branch protection on gitlab eg. website

mongols were mostly meat/milk/yogurt. fought ppl raised on grains.
army brought food with them - dried meat and their animals. didnt need large food supply chain.
decimal org made army highly mutable and mobile
not a hierarchy of units - set of concentric circles (pg 87)
used singing to communicate(88)

taboos on talking about death.
no honor in fighting - just winning. clever and deceptive.
cleared out villages, overrun the cities
created vconfusion. spread out. 
adopted chinese tech. siege machines

mongols werent so much horrific and terriyfing because of their barbaric acts liek kinds of europe.
they were fast and efficient and didnt care for the rich/aristocracy. not so muhc public cruelty (116)

more destroyer of cities than slayer of people - strategic, revenge, provoke fear.
destroy cities to improve flow of trade - less important / more inaccesible routes. funnel commerce 
into routes army could supervise. (119)
turned  farmland into pastures.

most cities fell in days or weeks

sought to trade with Khwarizm for their steel and glass blowing

mongols practiced only war, herding, hunting. assimilated professionals from every one they conqueryed. 
especially chinese and muslim.
always slaughtered rich and powerful. unlike aristocrats elsewhere who killed the common folk but not eachother (112)

celebration of beating khwarizm featured largest hunt in history (126)
tens of thousands of soldiers, months long hunt. year of preparation to fence the area.



-------



They made extensive use of
paper as spread rumours about how
large they were.

They would light multiple
campfires per squad to make the army look bigger from a distance, and spread
rumours of 

. If they could turn
their enemeies against themse

If wherever possible, 
like lighting multiple campfires per squad to make the army look
bigger, or pretending to retreat, only to return while their enemy was
celebrating early victory. They stirred confusion whereever they could, 
often causing peasants to stampede out of the fields towards the city, using the 
unorganized masses of their opponent to their own advantage. And they became
masters of propoganda, spreading inflated rumours of how large and terrible their army was
to scare whole cities into surrender. 

----------

in europe eg crusades, enemy aristocrats respected eachother, slauightered
commoners. mongols did not torture muiltiate or maim. others intilled terror
with public torture or multiation.  drag mongol warriers through the streets to
entertain. killed as sport and fed to dogs. drive nails into their heads. china
to europe. gruesome displays. slaughter for religion. behead people and play
with heads, kicking them like balls. pulled off limbs. escalation of terror
rather than fighitng. children in catapults. mongols less about cruelty/ferocity
more about speed and efficiency. more about unprecedented military success than
bloodlust or public cruelty.

numbers were preposterous. mongols often outnumbered 50 to 1. very little
archeological evidence of the millions of slaughtered. more destroyer of cities
than slayer of people. redirected trade by destroying less important / more
inaccessible cities.

ordered paper from koreans to document his ruthlessness and use for propogando

confusion and turmoil

The northern Chinese states were the first to fall. It was there the Mongols learned 
how to invade and destroy cities; how to use Chinese technology like siege machines 
and gunpowder. Having finally secured access to Chinese markets and goods, 

----


135. attraction to jesus. yesu. sounds like mongolian word for 9, sacred number
     and name of Genghis father Yesugei. small city of karakorum probably most
     religiously open and tolerant city in the world at the time. so many
     rdifferent religions wirship side by side

158. needed pastures. invasion into europe stopped where the pastures stopped.
     followed the steppe across central asia, russia, ukraine, poland , hungary.
     stopped.spped/mobility/surprise all lost in forests/rivers/plowed fields
     with crops/dirteches/hedges/fences. transition from dry steppe to humid
     climate of coast - dampness made bows lose strenfgth and made them sick

173. great open logical debate between religions

176. genghis authorized paper money backed by metal and silk. 
     later was more adhoc. grandson needed to standardize issuance of paper money. standardized local currencies to ease
     accounting. monetized taxes instead of just local goods. started to move
     money rather than goods. first time a standardized unit of account could be
     used from China to Persia.

201. Khubilai in china. less executions than modern US or China. more
     humanitarian than prior Sungs. fines over physical punishment. eradicate
     torture. as mongols were reducing and limitting use of tortue, Eiropeans
     were expanding

202.  preference for local dispute resolution. printed books on criminology.
     minimal reqs for crime scene handling. improved quality of law enforcement. 
     all ppl, not just elite, should know and act thru the law. law was more for
     handling probelms, creating unity and preserving peace than tool for
     decigin guilt and administering punishment.

     set minimum standards for knowledge for professions, standardize and raise
     level of prefessions. ensure wide access.

204. khubilai expanded paper money for commerce.accepted throughout. only worked
     in China, not Persia.  mongols introduced bankruptcy, allowed twice max. 
     expanded schools. scribes for many languages. tried to make a single
     alphabet for all of thenm. failed

206. organized paesants into households of 50 with broad
     responsibility/authority over their lives. local govt. mongols promoted
     literacy. oublic schools even for peasants. no one else had done this ...

221. System of "shares" for mongolian rulers to get portions of goods and
     services from different regions. 

225. mongols turned from warriors into share holders. in past aristocrats didnt
     partake in  commerce. undignified. european states tried to eb self
     sufficient and didnt  really trade. mongols elevated merchants

227. trod lightly on places conquered.didnt impose language or culture. forbade
     non mongols to learn their language. Mongol Peace. traidiotnal empires
     accumulate wealth in oen city. in mongolia things continuously flowing. 

231. adopted arabic and indian math for accounting and record keeping and
     calculations.  Khwarizm had been particularly important - Algorithm = Al
     Khwarizm. introduced Zero, negatives, and algebra to china. 

233. adopted printing. printing with movable leters began in China in 12th
    centuyray. Mongols employed on massive scale. used a smaller alphabet.
    increased general literacy. diseminated government decisions. massive
    production of books and drop in prices: agriculture, almanacs, scriptures,
    laws, histories, medical treatises, mathematical theories, songs, poetry,
    many languages.

    universalism: regiious tolerance, universal alphabet, relay stations, games,
    almanacs, money, astronomy charts. pragmatic rather than ideological. broke
    the monopoly on thought. 

234. foundation for modern system with original mongol emphasis on free
     commerce, open communciation, shared knowledge, secular politics, religious
     coexistence, international law, diplomatic immunity. Europe gained most.

236. Francis Bacon: printing, gunpowder, compass as foundation for modern world.
     all spread to the west during Mongol Empire.

239. europe admired the mongols in 14th century on dawn of renaisance.


destroyed by the plague

---
The Mongols sought to win by whatever means necessary. They found no honour in
fighting itself, and had many taboos on talking about death. Genghis Khan was obsessed with
preserving Mongol life and never sent his soldiers to die for him.
It wasn't so much superior weapons or technology that distinguished the Mongols,
but rather the cohesion and discipline learned from centuries of nomadic life
and the loyalty bred by the Great Law. 




While other armies fought on a given battle field or battle front, the Mongols came from were everywhere, 
playing tricks from every angle. While other armies looted villages and raped inhabitants, 
the Mongols put them to work.  


Will the current hyper-conneccted world order, of globalism and international
entities, of the WHO and the IMF, suffer a similar fate? And what world will
emerge in the aftermath? What mix of local self-sufficiency and globalist connectivity lies in
store for us in the next cycle of history? Is there a more sustainable escape to
the great cycles of history at all?
